>>LISA GARR: Hi, I'm Lisa Garr,
host of "Gaiam Inspirations,"
coming to you live from Boulder,
Colorado at the Gaiam Studios
here.
And since this is a
live, interactive show,
I encourage you
to connect with us
and communicate with us
through Facebook and Twitter.
Many of you have already done
that, so thank you so much.
And keep the comments
and questions
coming throughout the show.
So let me ask you a question.
Do you find it hard
to make changes?
Do you keep doing the same
things over and over again
that bother you, but
then you know better,
and you keep doing it anyway?
Do you find yourself
in that position?
Well, today we're going to talk
about how the brain evolves
and how to actually make
changes in the brain,
so we can break some
of these old patterns,
and better yet, create new ones.
And joining me is
Dr. Joe Dispenza.
He's a neuroscientist.
He's an expert on brain
functionality and brain
chemistry.
He's the author of
the book, "Breaking
the Habit of Being
Yourself," and get this,
I love this subtitle--
"How to Lose Your Mind
and Create a New One."
Welcome to the show.
Thanks for joining me.
>>JOE DISPENZA: Thank you, Lisa.
>>LISA: Absolutely great book.
And this is your latest release.
Can you tell us a little
bit about the book?
>>DISPENZA: Well the second
book, "Breaking the Habit,"
really was an opportunity for
me to contribute to people
that wanted to really know how.
I think it's a time in
history where people just
don't want to know, but
they want to know how.
So the premise of the
book really is simple.
It says your personality
creates your personal reality.
And your personality is made up
of how you think, how you act,
and how you feel.
So the present personality
sitting here today
has created the present personal
reality called your life, which
also means that if you wanted to
create a new personal reality,
then on a fundamental
level, you would have
to change some thoughts,
begin to behave differently,
and begin to live by
different emotions.
So I think the biggest
problem with all of us
is that we try to create
a new personal reality
as the same personality,
and it never works.
>>LISA: So you said, the way
to change that personality
is to change your thoughts.
>>DISPENZA: Mm-hmm.
>>LISA: Easier said than
done, and it's not just
about the thoughts.
>>DISPENZA: Mm-hmm.
>>LISA: You have to change your
entire physiology around it,
right?
>>DISPENZA: Absolutely.
So the key element to
change is to be greater
than your environment, to
be greater than your body,
and to be greater than time.
And when we get about
the business of change,
we're always interacting
with the same people,
and doing the same things,
and going to the same places.
And it's the environment,
our external world
that's controlling
how we think and feel.
>>LISA: Our patterns, right?
>>DISPENZA: The moment we
begin to react in the same way
to the same conditions
in our life,
then we begin to cause
different circuits in our brain
to turn on, equal to everything
that we know in our life.
And that repetition
over time begins
to hard wire our
brain to everything
familiar in our life.
>>LISA: So give me
an example of that.
>>DISPENZA: Well, you
wake up in the morning.
You go to work the same way.
You see the same
people, that push
the same emotional buttons.
You get at your desk
and you do the things
that you know how to do so well.
You drink coffee out
of your favorite mug.
You complain to the same
people in the same way, that
stir up the same emotions.
You see the same people that
push the same emotional buttons
with you.
And then, in time, we could say
that the environment, really,
is shaping and molding
how we think and feel.
So to change then is to be
greater than the environment,
to begin to act, and
think, and feel differently
than our present circumstances.
>>LISA: So it doesn't work
that you even just change
your routine, because you
will automatically set it up
to create the same
type of circumstances
with a whole different
routine-- if you change jobs,
if you take your child to
school, or whatever it is.
>>DISPENZA: Sure.
And there's a concept
in neuroscience
called neuroplasticity.
And plasticity
tells us that we're
changed by every
thought we think,
every new experience we have,
every different choice we make,
every new dream
that we fabricate.
The brain literally
reorganizes itself
to reflect a new level of mind.
Which begs the
question, I think,
that most people
really are thinking
the same way every day,
acting the same way,
and feeling the same way,
but really hoping something
will show up differently in
their life, and it never does.
So hard wiring our
brain over time
to the same
conditions in our life
then causes us to think
equal to everything we know.
And if we believe in any
way that our thoughts have
something to do with
our destiny, then
as long as we're reacting to
everything we know in our life,
we keep creating
more of the same.
>>LISA: So neuroplasticity is
the way that the brain actually
makes those changes.
It's the connections of
neurons, is that what it is?
>>DISPENZA: Yeah, they used
to say that your brain is hard
wired, and you're going to turn
out just like your parents,
and that you're
doomed by your genes,
and that's the end of your life.
But actually, we're marvels of
plasticity and adaptability.
And as long as you're
evolving your actions
and modifying your behaviors
to do a better job in life,
your brain literally
installs new circuitry
to reflect your own evolution.
>>LISA: And so
that new circuitry
comes, though, from our own
thoughts changing our brain,
or does it come from
the environment?
>>DISPENZA: Well, I
think most people really
wait for trauma, or crisis,
or loss, or disease, tragedy
in some way.
And then when they
get to that point
where we reach our
lowest denominator,
that's when we begin
to examine ourselves.
And that concept in neuroscience
is called meta cognition.
And meta cognition says
that we can pay attention
to how we think.
We can notice how we feel.
We can become aware
of how we act.
So that those are in place so
we can modify our behaviors
to begin to produce
different outcomes.
So plasticity gives us
that permission to do it.
But once again,
though, biology then
is a direct result
of consciousness.
So if you keep
everything the same,
then your biology
stays the same.
And now you're headed
for your genetic destiny.
>>LISA: So Dr.
Joe was in a movie
called "The People versus
the State of illusion."
And it's all about how
we have positive thoughts
and they get overridden
by our negative thoughts.
And the whole movie--
it's a great movie.
It made a huge impact on me.
And I see a lot of movies.
But this was a
transformational film
set around a storyline
of a man who basically
lost his daughter to the social
system because he got arrested.
And it really touched my heart.
And throughout the movie
of this story, of this man,
was all the learnings and the
teachings that come through.
We have a trailer of this.
I want you to see this movie.
It's really great.
It made a big impact on me.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> My name is Austin Vickers,
and I'm an attorney involved
in what may be the most
important trial you will ever
witness.
And it is literally a
matter of life and death.
One in every 15
American children
will go to jail
in their lifetime.
Over half of all marriages
will end in divorce.
Over 50% of deaths
in the United States
can be attributed to
behavioral or social factors,
the majority of which
are rooted in stress.
More people will die
from suicide each year
than from all of the world's
armed conflicts combined.
>> We have all kinds
of different stress--
traffic jams, internet
connections, second mortgages,
single parenting.
And all of those reactions
to the environment
produce the same
physiological response.
People are so focused on the
content of their perceptions
that they are unaware of how
those perceptions are formed
and how those
patterns are actually
helping to create the
problems in life that
appear to be happening to them.
>> This film is important if you
want to experience more love,
more freedom, reconnect with
who you were meant to be in this
lifetime.
>> It's often said that
people are afraid of dying.
I think they're more
afraid of living.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA: Really incredible movie.
And it really dives into what
the negative emotions does
to our brain, to our
lives, and so forth.
What does that look like in
the brain, negative emotions?
>>DISPENZA: Well, one of the
key components about emotions,
thoughts are the
language of the brain,
and feelings and emotions
are the language of the body.
And when we react to
difficult situations
in our life,
stressful situations,
we turn on that fight or flight
nervous system that begins
to mobilize all of this energy.
And what was once very adaptive,
like if you were being chased
by a lion thousands
of years ago,
you'd have to mobilize a lot of
energy to either stay and fight
or to run.
Now it becomes more
complex in our society,
because you could
see a co-worker,
you could see your
mother-in-law--
>>LISA: You could
have a bad day.
>>DISPENZA: You
could have a bad day.
You could begin to auto suggest
about problems in your life.
And the privilege of
being a human being
is that we can make thought
more real than anything else.
And when we do that, we begin
to turn on the stress response
just by thought alone.
And stress is when the body's
knocked out of balance.
The stress response is what the
body does to innately turn it
back to order.
The problem is if you keep
turning on that fight or flight
nervous system, that imbalance
now becomes the new balance.
And now we're
headed for disease.
>>LISA: Chronic, mm-hmm.
>>DISPENZA: So the
stress in the brain
causes the forebrain, or
rational brain to turn off,
and the hindbrain to begin
to secrete all these juices.
So what was once very adaptive
thousands of years ago
becomes very
maladaptive, because it's
those chemicals of stress that
push the genetic buttons that
begin to create disease.
And if you think about this, we
can turn on the stress response
just by thought alone.
Then by very nature, our
thoughts can make us sick.
So if our thoughts
can make us sick,
is it possible that our
thoughts could make us well?
>>LISA: There's a clip that
shows this, that really shows
the entire fight or flight
response in the body,
that we have here.
Can you tell us a
little bit about this?
>>DISPENZA: Sure, we
were just talking about--
you see a lion in
the Serengeti, you're
going to turn on a very
primitive nervous system.
But it doesn't
have to be a lion,
it could be your
mother-in-law and you'll
have the same reaction.
Or you can begin to think
my bills are overdue,
rent is overdue, I
have problems at work.
And just by you thinking
about your problems,
you begin to turn on the same
reaction in your brain and body
as if you were being
chased by a lion.
And that effect, then, that
begins to knock the body out
of balance, begins to turn on
this primitive nervous system
that begins to secrete a lot
of adrenaline and cortisol.
And those chemicals,
those stress hormones,
give the body a rush of energy.
You're prepared for an
emergency situation.
So your pupils dilate.
Then your salivary juices
begin to slow down.
You start to get more blood
pumping into your body.
Your heart rate and respiratory
rate begin to increase.
And blood is sent
to your extremities.
And you're prepared for
an emergency situation.
Now you're ready to
either fight or run.
So it's all great.
The problem is is that
if you're confronting
the same person in your life,
you're going to the same job,
and you're seeing the
same co-worker that
pushes the same
emotional button,
that in time then,
you're subconsciously
or unconsciously knocking your
brain and body out of balance.
And the long-term effects
then begin to create disease.
>>LISA: Can the body
become then addicted
to the adrenaline rush
that comes from those fight
or flight situations?
>>DISPENZA: Absolutely.
If you think about
it, if you're getting
a rush of energy, a
rush of adrenaline,
that's like a triple cappuccino.
All of a sudden, you get this
heightened sense of awareness.
The brain and the body
wake up momentarily.
Now that only should
last for about 90 seconds
to two minutes.
And I tell my
children all the time,
if you're angry for more than
two minutes, you're faking it.
In other words, when the
stress response happens,
we should be able to control it.
A good example of an addiction
is something you can't stop.
So if you were in the midst
of say an angry reaction
to something in your life,
and I came up to you,
and I said, Lisa, listen, I
know you're angry, but why
don't you just stop right now?
Most people would say,
are you kidding me?
>>LISA: Right.
>>DISPENZA: It's because of
this situation and this person.
And I'd say, yeah, yeah, I
know, but just stop that.
So if you're unable to stop
the emotional reaction,
then that's the definition
of an addiction.
So these chemicals
really are highly charged
energetic signatures.
And they create the
emotional states
of anger, and aggression, and
hatred, and judgment, and fear,
and anxiety, and hopelessness,
and powerlessness,
and depression.
Those chemicals knock
the body out of balance.
And we begin to call those
altered states of consciousness
normal states of consciousness.
And, in fact, they're
really causing
us to live as
primitive human beings.
>>LISA: And then they
turn into habits.
>>DISPENZA: Right, because
as the emotion begins to run,
the chemicals that
run through the body
begin to signal the very
thoughts that we think.
And when we're in the midst
of an emotional reaction
to something or
someone in our life,
there's always a gap between the
way things appear and the way
things really are.
The chemicals alter
our perception.
And if we react during
the refractory period
of those chemicals,
we'll always say,
I should've never said that.
I should have
never thought that.
I should have never done that.
>>LISA: But I mean, if somebody
did something that was wrong,
and I get upset over it, are
you telling me not to get upset?
>>DISPENZA: No, no, I'm saying
that emotions are part of life.
There's nothing wrong with
having an emotional reaction.
The question is, how long the
refractory period of chemicals
run.
And if you keep an emotional
reaction running for hours
or days, that's called a mood.
And if you ask a person,
why are you in this mood,
they'll tell you because
something happened 10 days ago.
And if you keep that
refractory period
going for weeks or months,
that's called a temperament.
And you'd say, why do you have
such an angry temperament.
And that person
would say something
happened to me 10 months ago.
And if you keep the refractory
period going for years on end,
that's called a
personality trait.
And so if we wanted to change
some aspect of our personality,
we have to look at the
emotions, layer by layer,
that we memorize, that's
become part of our identity.
And if emotions are
the record of the past,
and you're living by the
same emotion every day,
then you're living in the past.
And your body as
the unconscious mind
is believing that it's
in the same circumstances
24 hours a day--
>>LISA: Moment by moment.
>>DISPENZA: --seven days
a week, 365 days a year.
And that body can't take the
redundancy of those chemicals.
And that's when it
begins to break down.
Just like being in the presence
of a lion, in the same cage
with a lion day long.
>>LISA: All the time.
>>DISPENZA: So emotional
intelligence, then,
is learning how to shorten
that refractory period.
And as you begin to shorten
that refractory period,
it doesn't create your identity.
You get to say,
just like a child,
you move through the
emotion, you get rid of it.
And it doesn't filter
your perception
for the rest of your day or
for the rest of your life.
>>LISA: That is what
resilience is essentially.
So we have some clips
that I talked to you
about that are actual slides of
what the neurons in the brain
look like when they create
new responses to things,
new memories, right?
>>DISPENZA: Sure, we'll talk
about primarily-- the first two
clips show how we have
neurons actually connecting
and hard wiring into
certain patterns.
>>LISA: OK so this could
be a negative pattern or--
>>DISPENZA: It could
be a negative pattern
or a positive pattern.
If you have good habits, and
you have things about yourself
that you like, and
you do certain things
that you have become
skilled at, well, that's
a good hardwired pattern
that you want to maintain.
But if you have
some habits that are
self-destructive
or self-limiting,
those are fired and wired
by your own volition.
Now the principal says that
if you stop thinking, acting,
and feeling the
same way, the nerve
cells that no longer
fire together no
longer wire together.
As you stop communicating
neurologically, just
like any relationship,
you begin to break apart
those connections.
>>LISA: So you have a
thought in the brain.
This is what it looks like.
Or is this a memory?
>>DISPENZA: So this is a memory.
When two neurons have
fired and wired together,
they have a lasting
relationship that
can be related to any thought,
skill, behavior, concept,
or some idea.
>>LISA: And so they
create a synapse together.
>>DISPENZA: They develop
a long-term relationship.
And those connections facilitate
a stream of consciousness.
They facilitate a level of mind.
>>LISA: There's
another slide here.
>>DISPENZA: So this is
another hardwired neuron.
They're in a long-term
relationship.
This could be fear.
It could be joy.
It could be brushing your teeth.
Those neurons now have
been used enough times
that they're mapped
neurologically in the brain.
>>LISA: So they create a
bridge, essentially a chain.
>>DISPENZA: Exactly.
If you look at this slide here,
this slide represents learning.
Every time you
learn something new
you make a new synaptic
connection in your brain.
So as you pay attention and
you begin to become present
in the moment, your
brain literally up
scales its hardware to
reflect the new level of mind.
>>LISA: That is amazing.
It's like it reaches--
it's almost as if it's
reaching for the new--
>>DISPENZA: There's
an intelligence there.
And so, it's amazing,
because we reach
a certain point in our life, I
think, where we stop learning
and we start feeling.
And when we do that, we trade
off our own personal evolution.
>>LISA: What do
you mean by that?
>>DISPENZA: Well, we get
to a point in our life
where we pretty much can
predict the feeling of anything.
You get to be about
35 or 40 years old,
psychology tells us that
the personality's usually
complete at that point.
And in some degree, that's true.
And so people experience
relationships,
they experience sexuality.
They experience their
successes and their failures,
their importance, and their
unworthiness, and their guilt.
And they pretty much experience
much of what life has to offer.
So when you can predict
the feeling of anything,
well how can anything
new show up in your life,
because by very definition,
you're forecasting your future
based on your past.
We've reached this
point where we're
using feelings as a
barometer to determine life.
We'll always miss adventure.
We'll always miss opportunities.
So when we begin to
continue to learn, continue
to evolve our actions, continue
to experience new things,
continue to step outside the
box and try something else out,
you're going to shake up
neurologically your own sub
structures in your brain.
>>LISA: I love that.
I love that.
So if you have a pattern
that you would like to break,
by introducing new thoughts--and
we're going to get into that--
but this is what it actually
looks like in the brain.
>>DISPENZA: The
first stage anytime
is that you have to begin
to assemble a new mind.
So if you wanted to become a
more loving parent or a more
patient parent, or if
you wanted to become
a more successful businesswoman
or a more successful
entrepreneur, the first thing
you're going to have to do
is you're going to
have to start asking
some important questions, like
what is it to be successful?
What do I have to change
about myself to be wealthy?
What does a great
parent look like?
Who in history was
great that I admire?
>>LISA: And how did they think?
>>DISPENZA: And
how did they think?
And as you begin to
read this information,
you're installing new
circuits in your brain.
But you better review
that information
because it takes a
series of repetitions
before you begin to
create networks of neurons
that will literally
become the forerunner
to the next experience.
So now, when you learn that
knowledge, and you apply it,
and you personalize it,
and you demonstrate it,
you're going to modify
your behavior in some way.
And when you change
your actions,
you're going to have
a new experience.
Now experience is
going to really enrich
the brain, because
jungles of neurons
are going to begin to organize
to reinforce the circuits
you learned intellectually.
The moment that happens, the
experience produces an emotion.
And the moment you feel success,
the moment you feel compassion,
the moment you feel
like a great parent, now
you're instructing and
teaching your body chemically
what your mind has
intellectually understood.
So you could say knowledge
is for the brain,
but experiences is for the body.
Change looks like this.
Most people sit on the couch
with the remote control.
They got their laptop over here.
They got their smartphone here.
They got the television
in front of them.
And they say, oh, I think
I'm going to change tomorrow.
Now, what do you think the
body, as the unconscious mind,
is going to say?
What you think the body as the
mind reader is going to say?
>>LISA: No, it's not.
>>DISPENZA: No, relax,
you're not going to change.
But when you say, listen,
I don't care how I feel--
body, I don't care how
long it takes-- time.
I don't care what's going
on in my life-- environment.
I'm going to do this.
And the hair on the back
of your neck stands up.
The body gets a very strong
signal, which means, uh-oh,
she's serious this time.
>>LISA: That's an aha moment.
>>DISPENZA: It's a moment
where the body gets--
the decision is
an experience that
begins to rewrite the program.
So that being said, there's
no actual amount of time
that it takes the
change a habit.
Some people can do it overnight.
Some people can
make the decision,
and the message reaches
the body electrochemically,
and the person has done.
Other people have
to pay attention.
They have to really
repeat it enough times.
There's a length of time
that they're actually putting
their attention behind it.
There's a lot of variables.
But the key ingredient
is inspiration.
Because when you come out
of your resting state,
the body is the servant to
the mind, it's the animal.
And just like when you're
training an unbridled horse,
when you get ready
to ride that horse,
and you pull the reins in,
and you give it a good kick,
the horse says, OK, the
rider's ready this time.
>>LISA: It's serious, yes.
>>DISPENZA: And if you've
been away from the horse,
and you climb on that horse,
and you're not ready--
>>LISA: They'll know.
>>DISPENZA: The
horse is the mind.
They did a scientific
experiment where
they took a group
of children that
scored poorly in mathematics.
And they taught them study
habits, and time management,
and outlining, and review.
And they gave them a
test three months later.
And these children
scored basically
the same or slightly higher.
They took another
group of children
and they taught them a short
course in neuroscience.
They showed them pictures
of neurons changing,
how the brain works.
And when they took
their test, they
scored way higher, because they
understood what they were doing
and why.
>>LISA: That's what I was
saying earlier, that these
made such an impact on me.
I will always have this visual
memory of what a memory is
and how it's created.
It's so interesting to me.
>>DISPENZA: It's exciting.
>>LISA: So what
we're going to do
is, we're going to
take a quick break.
When we come back, we're going
to figure out what happiness
really looks like in the brain.
And how the emotions, when
you create change in the mind,
and it goes into the body, how
then that can effect change
in other people.
And you can actually
make effect and changes
on other people's
healing and growth.
And so, we're going to look
at that when we come back.
Dr. Joe Dispenza is my guest.
And continue to give us
your comments and questions
on Facebook and Twitter.
We are going to be answering
some of your questions.
Tell me about what habits
you'd like to break.
I'd really like
to find that out.
We'll be right back.
This is Lisa Garr.
You're watching
"Gaiam Inspirations."
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA: Hi, welcome back
to "Gaiam Inspirations."
This is Lisa Garr.
My guest is Dr. Joe Dispenza.
And we're talking about how
to create change in the mind.
Joe, from Facebook,
is actually asking--
and keep their comments and
questions coming on Facebook
and Twitter online here--
if my thoughts
create my reality,
why isn't anything changing?
>>DISPENZA: That's
a great question.
Because if you're waking
up as the same person,
and doing the same
things, and you're
allowing your environment
to control your thinking,
then as long as you keep
seeing the same people that
are familiar, and having
the same thoughts,
and feeling the same
familiar emotions,
you're going to
keep creating more
of the same familiar
things in your life.
>>LISA: Because the neural
bridges have been built.
>>DISPENZA: Because your mind--
according to the quantum
model of reality,
your environment is an
extension of your mind.
So if you truly
change your mind,
there should be
evidence in your life.
So most people,
as I said earlier,
are trying to create
some type of change
in their personal reality.
But they're still
the same personality.
We have to become somebody else.
So if you were to
sit down and you
began to think about
a new way of being,
a new thought that would connect
to a new emotion, that could
drive you to plan
a new behavior,
and you reviewed
that enough times,
there's a good possibility that
you would change your brain
neurologically, and you would
emotionally signal your body
chemically to signal
new genes, to look
like your brain and body
already had the experience.
The biological and
neuroscientific model
says it's possible.
And if you could get up
as a different person
than you sat down--
now here's the key--
and then to maintain
that modified
state of being your
entire day, independent
of your environment,
something unusual
should happen in your life.
That's the law.
So it's like this-- most
people do a meditation.
They have a great meditation.
And then they spend the rest of
the day in a state of judgment
or stress, just like eating
an organic, healthy breakfast
and then spending the rest
of your day eating junk food.
>>LISA: Right.
>>DISPENZA: The
purpose of meditation
is to prime the brain and body
into a new state of being,
to elevate your sense of self
so that the environment is
no longer-- you're
not effective by it.
Actually, you've changed
something inside of you,
both neurologically and
chemically, in mind and body,
that now you're
beginning to produce
an effect in your environment.
So I always recommend,
experiment in your reality.
We are scientists in our life.
And if you could say,
OK, I'm taking my time
out of my busy day today--
>>LISA: I was just going
to use that example.
So if I'm a busy
mom, and I'm working,
and all this, and I
have always this tugging
feeling that I have to be in
two places at the same time.
And if I then can change the
programming in my mind and make
the decision that I move through
my day with ease and grace--
I move through my day
with ease and grace,
then things and
people will start
to align around that, really?
>>DISPENZA: Well, you
have to start to wire it
in your brain--
>>LISA: OK.
>>DISPENZA: Until you start to
actually accept the thought,
>>LISA: OK.
>>DISPENZA: It means it's got
to make it past the brain stem
and start to stimulate the mind.
>>LISA: And all the
judgment, and the filters,
and the fast programming,
like we saw in the neurons.
>>DISPENZA: Because if you can't
get beyond the analytical mind,
you never enter into the
operating system where
the change has to take place.
The purpose of meditation is to
get beyond the analytical mind.
When you begin to
change your brainwaves
and you slip into the operating
system of the subconscious,
now when you say I move through
my day with grace and ease,
and flow finds me,
and I live in no time
and accomplish everything, there
is a biological effect that's
taking place in your body.
And as you begin to feel like
what that would feel like,
when mind and body
are working together,
now you get up in
a state of being.
Because a state of being is
when thoughts and feelings
are aligned.
Now you have to practice that
enough times so that it begins
to become familiar to you.
But if you did
this, and you said,
OK, universal mind, quantum
field, giver of life,
I took time out of my day
to emulate you as a creator.
So listen, if I'm
just a child of God,
and I'm practicing
this and experimenting,
I got to know that you're real.
So listen, if you've been
paying attention to my efforts,
show me a sign.
But don't show me
a typical sign.
Show me a sign
that I could never
predict, that surprises
me, that leaves no doubt
that what I did
inside of me produced
some result outside
of me, so that I'm
inspired to do it again.
>>LISA: So now this is the
slide of what neuroplasticity
looks like in the brain.
The firings that you see are
electrical impulses happening.
And this is as we think.
How many times a
day does this occur?
>>DISPENZA: When you're in
your analytical critical self,
and you're in a certain
level of awareness,
your brain has to
create meaning between
the external environment and
the internal environment.
That's the function
of the brain.
So it's gathering all
this data and trying
to make meaning out of it.
But when you begin
to pay attention,
and you begin to
focus and concentrate,
the frontal lobe acts
like a volume control.
And it doesn't want
to be distracted
by any extraneous stimuli.
So it begins to quiet down the
motor circuits in the brain
and you become still.
It cools off the
sensory circuits,
and you no longer
feel your body.
It cools off the
circuits in your brain
that process is time and space.
It even shuts out the
lights in the visual cortex
of your brain.
And it cools off the
mind-brain activity
in your association centers.
Now why does this happen?
Because when you're
able to quiet down
the circuits in your brain that
are reflected to everything
you know in your
life, the thought
that you're thinking
in that moment
literally becomes
the experience.
The thought becomes
The brain upscales its
hardware to reflect the thought
as the experience.
So when the frontal lobe
is paying attention,
and you're truly in
a moment of presence,
your brain doesn't want to
be distracted by anything.
So according the
functional scans,
as the brain begins to
quiet-- the frontal lobe
begins to quiet down the
rest of the brain, that's
when you begin to no
longer feel your body.
You lose track of your identity.
You forget about your
external environment.
>>LISA: That's what
the zone is, isn't it?
>>DISPENZA: That
zone, then flow,
that moment where the thought
is you're one with something,
there's a biological
reason for it.
And that's when the frontal
lobe, the forebrain,
begins to get in control.
>>LISA: So how do you
suggest that people--
someone's asking--
Kate on Facebook--
shake things up to
break these habits?
How do you interrupt
the pattern?
>>DISPENZA: Well, this
is the exciting part--
this is an exciting
time to be alive.
I mean, if you're happy with
your life the way it is,
that's wonderful.
But know I think that people
secretly believe that they
could always do a better job.
I don't care if I'm
talking to prison inmates
or I'm talking to CEOs.
>>LISA: Do you think
the brain really
has a desire to achieve a
higher order of some kind?
Do you really?
>>DISPENZA: I don't
think it's the brain.
I think it's you and I that
use the brain to create
different levels of mind.
And so the brain is highly--
it's full of water.
It's 78% water.
It's very plastic.
And to shake things
up, of course,
is to begin to do
the unpredictable,
to begin to step outside of
the familiar, learn new things,
apply them, begin to
have new experiences,
and see if those
experiences lead to wisdom,
give you a greater
understanding.
And become a scientist
in your life.
I mean, I love to begin to
make changes inside of me
and then look for the
results outside of me.
I love to see--
if I'm changing my
mind in some way,
then let's see if there's
evidence in my life.
Think about it-- how do
you know that you're you?
You look in the mirror and you
see your face, that reflection.
So how does the ego know itself?
It's the environment.
So your environment then
reflects back to you
your level of mind.
So if you can change your
mind then, do it, and see,
well, let's see, if I change
up something inside of me,
if there's some
effect outside of me.
And begin to play with
that a little bit,
and see where it takes you.
>>LISA: Experiment a little bit.
There's a clip that Dr.
Joe did from the movie,
"People Versus the
Power of Illusion."
>>DISPENZA: "The
State of Illusion."
>>LISA: "The State
of Illusion,"--
"People Versus the
State of Illusion,"
and it talks all
about how we are
able to change and the
addictions to the old habits
that we have.
Let's see that clip.
>> The person who memorizes
a great golf swing,
and they put all
their attention on it,
and they practice it
over and over again,
over and over again, over time
that swing will become more
and more natural.
That's the beauty of
being a human being.
By the same means,
the person who
practices suffering and
thinks of all the reasons
to complain in their
life, and judges others,
complains, and blames, and
makes excuses, and feels sorry
for themselves, they're
doing the same exact thing
neurologically as the person
who's mastering the golf swing
or mastering different
states of mind.
The principle is
absolutely the same.
The effects are different
based on the levels of mind.
So the repetition
over time not only
makes the neurons
begin to function
in more hardwired
patterns, but they
begin to accommodate
and form more
stronger connections,
thicker circuits
to reflect who and where we are.
We are all masters.
The question is what have
you memorized so well
that your internal
order is greater
than any external
condition in your life.
>> Even when we become aware
of these destructive emotional
and perceptual patterns,
breaking out of them,
and thinking and
perceiving in new ways,
requires an effort much like the
one an alcoholic or drug addict
must go through to break the
habit of these addictions.
>>LISA: So this
really states the case
for why we need to change
and why it's difficult.
As I mentioned at the
very beginning the show.
And I don't want to reaffirm
by saying change is difficult.
And I get kind of stuck by that,
because I would like to tell
myself, as if change is easy.
>>DISPENZA: Well,
once again, that's
one of the reasons I wrote
"Breaking the Habit,"
is because once you
understand the how to,
that you can't use your
conscious mind to do this,
you have to move beyond
the analytical mind.
And when you understand
brainwave patterns,
and when you slip into a
different state of mind,
that it's easier to do it.
Because most people then--
95% of who we are by the
time we're 35 years old
is a set of memorized
habits and behaviors
that become part of our
identity or personality.
So 5% of the conscious
mind is trying
to change 95% of what
we've memorized, hardwired,
become addicted to emotionally.
So the person may want
to think positively,
but they've been feeling
negatively and oiling
those programs for
the last 25 years.
They might want a new
life with new conditions.
And as they use
their conscious mind
to focus on that, their
subconscious mind,
they've been programmed
to feel guilty.
That's mind and
body in opposition.
We have to begin to recondition
the body to a new mind.
So change isn't hard, it's just
that you got to get the manual
to understand how to begin
to unlearn and relearn,
to break the habit of the old
self and reinvent the new self.
>>LISA: Joe on Facebook is
familiar with the phrase
of acting as if.
How do you act as if?
It seems to be a disconnect for
him, where he's acting as if,
but he really knows
it's not happening?
>>DISPENZA: Well, this is a
kind of an interesting paradigm,
because Newtonian physics
is about cause and effect.
You and I wait for--
for most people,
they wait for a
reason to feel joyful,
for a reason to feel gratitude.
And when the event happens,
then they give thanks.
That's cause and effect.
The quantum model
of reality really
says something different.
The quantum model
of reality says
you have to change your
mind and body, thoughts
and feelings ahead
of the actual event,
so your brain and body
are physically changed
to look like it's
already happened.
So if you begin to
give thanks ahead
of the experience-- and
your body, by the way,
is the unconscious mind.
It does not know the difference
between an event in your life
that produces an
emotion or an emotion
that you fabricate
by thought alone.
To the body, it's
the exact same.
>>LISA: OK.
>>DISPENZA: So,
if you could begin
to move into a state in which
you were giving thanks before
it took place, and you could
convince your body emotionally
that that then already
happened because you were
in a state of gratitude, then
you would begin to literally
biologically change your
body to no longer be
a record of the past, but now,
in fact, a map to the future.
Because if your brain
and body are beginning
to respond neurologically
and chemically,
now you're moving into
a new state of being.
And if you can get up
in that state of being,
then what you did inside of
you should cause and effect
outside of you.
So the quantum model
says then that we
have to give thanks
ahead of the event.
We have to move into the state
of joy and change our energy
before it happens, so
much so that we're not
using our senses to
determine reality any longer.
So if we're living by
the emotion of pessimism,
or depression, or sadness, or--
>>LISA: You can't
see those potentials.
>>DISPENZA: You cannot
see those potentials,
because the emotion, which
is connected to the past,
is actually filtering
your perception.
In order for you to
begin to see possibility
you got to look at
the thoughts that
are creating that
pessimism, that
are happening behind the
scenes of your awareness.
You got to look at your
behaviors that demonstrate
pessimism or unhappiness.
And then you've got to look
at the other emotions that
are generated from pessimism.
And when you can
observe those programs
it means you're no
longer to the program,
you're the consciousness
observing the program.
And if you can become
so familiar with the way
you think, act, and feel, so
much so that they would never
go by unnoticed by
you, biologically,
and neurologically,
and chemically you
would begin to break the
circuits in your brain that
are connected to the old you.
Because nerve cells
that no longer
fire together no
longer wire together.
And if you no longer signal
the same gene emotionally,
because you're no longer
allowing those emotions to be
created in the body,
and you begin to say,
now, let me think about
what joy looks like.
Let me begin to
demonstrate optimism.
And you begin to read about,
say, Ernest Shackleton,
who crossed the Antarctic
with all those men
and spent $600 days away
and because of his optimism,
he overcame--
>>LISA: Oh, we've heard
it so many times, yes.
>>DISPENZA: So, if you began
to think, well, if that guy can
do it, I can do it.
And you began to
plan your behaviors,
and you began to modify them to
produce different experiences
that created different
emotions, you
would literally begin to
reinvent neurologically
and biologically a new self.
>>LISA: See, that's cool.
That is a very cool, yes.
>>DISPENZA: But
most people don't
like to look in the dark place.
They would rather turn on the
TV, or get on the cell phone
and complain.
>>LISA: But awareness
is 80% of the solution.
>>DISPENZA: Right.
>>LISA: That's why I have a
radio show called "Aware Show,"
yeah.
>>DISPENZA: But my point
is you can learn and change
in a state of pain and suffering
or you can learn and change
in a state of joy
and inspiration.
First, usually people wait till
they've reached the point where
they've broken down.
I'm saying, why wait?
>>LISA: Right.
>>DISPENZA: Why not just do it?
>>LISA: So for you
at home that want
to get a whole recap
of that, I want
you to watch this next clip,
because it shows the full,
in an animation way,
what this looks like,
how you can create this change.
Let's go ahead and play that
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The ease and grace is something
that I go in and out of.
And I'd like to be
in ease and grace
more than I fall out of it.
So I understand I'm a work
in progress with that.
And I give myself
patience on that.
But I really would like to be in
that ease and grace state more.
>>DISPENZA: I'm going
to tell you the hardest
part of all of this.
The hardest part of all of this,
everything we're talking about,
is one simple thing.
>>LISA: What?
>>DISPENZA: Making
the time to do it.
That's it.
>>LISA: Is it making the
decision or making the time?
>>DISPENZA: Making the
time for your precious self
to eliminate the people in
your life and the things
that you do, just for
a short period of time
when you wake up in the
morning or before you
go to bed at night,
and you say, OK,
what is the greatest ideal of
myself that I want to be today.
But listen, I'm not going to
get up until I am this person.
And you begin to wrestle
with your limitations
and overcome them.
There's so much talk in the
United States about self-love.
People think self-love
is getting a manicure
or buying a sports car.
That's not self-love.
That's pleasure.
Self-love is when you're
sitting with yourself
and you are working
on overcoming
your hardwired
thoughts, or beliefs,
or your emotional
propensities that
are connected to your
past, and you are really
working to overcome them.
And right on the other side
of your pain is freedom.
Right on the other side
of your fear is courage.
of your sadness is joy.
It's the same energy.
It's just trapped in the body.
And when you stretch
yourself past that point,
and you break free
from the chains
of those emotional addictions,
a side effect of that
is called joy.
And the body is liberated
from that level of mind.
And when that happens,
there's available energy
to create with.
And so, when you
break through that,
you begin to love yourself.
You begin to respect yourself.
And you begin to love
and respect others,
because you see
yourself in them.
And now that you're
free from it,
you can understand
them with compassion,
without knee jerking
in the same way.
So the difficulty here is
really making the time to do it.
And if you began to think
about a new way of being,
and you've moved into
a state where you said
I'm not going to get up
until I am this person.
And not only did you memorize
it neurologically in your brain,
but you allowed the
thoughts that you
were thinking to become
the experience to the point
that your body as
the unconscious mind
began to live in that future
reality in the present moment.
And when you got up when mind
and body were working together
in that state of
being, and you said,
I'm going to maintain the
state of being my entire day.
And I don't care, bring
on the challenges,
because I want to
test my greatness,
and you did that the entire
day, the end of your day, when
you finished your day,
more than likely you'd
have more energy than
when you started.
>>LISA: Forget neuroscientists,
you should just
be a motivational speaker.
Because that was so
beautifully put, absolutely.
And then the time
that you practice that
in the morning gets shorter,
and shorter, and shorter,
before it becomes a
habit, just like we
saw with the connections.
>>DISPENZA: And the
word meditation,
the literal translation of
the word meditation in Tibetan
means to become familiar with.
The symbol means to
become familiar with.
So if you're becoming
conscious of or familiar
with your unconscious
self, to the point you're
so conscious of your
unconscious thoughts,
so familiar with your
unconscious habits,
and so aware of your
emotions, that you would never
let them go by unnoticed
by you, there's
no chance for you to return
back to the old self--
to know thyself.
And then if you became
familiar with a new self,
because you neurologically fired
and wired it in your brain,
and you emotionally
conditioned your body,
and you were able to
do it enough times,
sooner or later it
would get easier,
and it would become
more familiar to you.
And you would be able to move
into that state of being.
By the way, a new state of
being is a new personality.
And a new personality is
a new personal reality.
>>LISA: So one of our
Facebook listeners
is asking about his father,
who has a habit of smoking.
And is that something
that he could
help him break that
habit, or does it
have to come from his
father's internal will?
How do you break something
that's a chain habit like that?
>>DISPENZA: Well, one of
the things about substances
is that it actually
helps to change chemistry
in the brain and body.
So there becomes a chemical
dependence on it at that point.
But the person who wants to
change has to want to change.
That's the first element.
>>LISA: It is.
>>DISPENZA: In other words,
no one can make you change,
but you have to find
it in you to really see
if this is what you want to do.
And I've studied people
over the last 12 years.
Why is it that one
person, an old timer,
can look at his X-rays, and
see a spot on his lungs,
and the doctor will say to him--
hey, George, that's
a spot on your lungs.
It's nothing now, but if you
keep smoking, it will be.
And that guy just
takes his cigarettes,
throws them in the trash
and he's done the next day.
How do you explain that?
He made the decision.
And the decision
was an experience.
And it began to rewrite his
chemistry and his biology.
Hey, how can a person
who moves into a state
of religious ecstasy, a
state of absolute faith,
drink strychnine and
not get poisoned by it?
It's a decision.
It's an energetic decision.
>>LISA: Wow, it's how
powerful the mind really is.
>>DISPENZA: So people
then who actually
want to make the
decision to change,
have to make the decision
with firm intention.
>>LISA: You have
stated it very clearly
in this clip, that was
from the movie, "The People
versus the State of Illusion."
It's really well.
Just to kind of wrap
it up, I want you
to take a look at this clip.
>> So if I had 60 seconds to
live and I had something tell
the world, I think my message
would be something pretty
simple.
I would say our
whole purpose in life
really is not to be good,
or do the right thing,
or to be successful, or to be
famous, or to even please God.
Our whole purpose in life is
to express God through us,
to express that divinity
through all of us.
And the way that
we do that is we
transform ourselves from an
old state to a new state.
And when we begin to
remove those limitations,
that's when that
intelligence that gives us
life, that is the source, begins
to express itself through us
and we become more like it.
>>LISA: Beautifully stated.
We're not doomed by our genes
, or our genetic profile,
or our circumstances
that we were raised in.
We are and we have the full
ability to be able to change.
And I say co-create with
God, but however people
want to do it to.
>>DISPENZA: Sure.
>>LISA: To be able to
change your circumstances.
And that goes for--
I mean, does it
also go for people
that have anxiety
and things that
come from genetic patterns?
>>DISPENZA: Absolutely, I
mean, anxiety is just really
just conditioning your
body to live in the future
and expecting the
worst case scenario.
Depression is just
looking in the past,
so much so that your
body begins to see
hopelessness and powerlessness.
>>LISA: Thank you so much.
Thank you very much.
You're just an
amazing inspiration.
I really appreciate it.
>>DISPENZA: Thank you, Lisa.
>>LISA: And you can
go to GaiamTV.com
to see this interview and many
more inspiring interviews.
You can get your free trial
right there, GaiamTV.com.
Until next time, I invite
you to stay inspired.